Hello and welcome back to the course on databases.
So in other data sets are uploaded.
And today we're going to create our very first join.
So let's go and have a look at what we're going to be working with.
So we're going to be looking at the two tables that we have which are pets and owners.
So let's Right-Click pets and select the top thousand rows.
So here we've got a code that it was already generated for us which helps us select the top thousand
rows from the stage where we can even remove this part because we know it's not a big table so we can
just look at everything and there's only there's only 100 rows anyway.
So what we want to do now is we want to join this table to the owners table that we have here so let's
go ahead and bring this table in as well so I'll say also is Alexis star from.
And then you can just put this table in here.
And in fact we're going to replace these column names with also six star from for consistency.
Remove that and now if we are on this we don't actually need pads here because we've selected pets at
the top so we can just run that or just so everything is safe and we are definitely working with the
right database.
We're going to say use pets at the top and then it's a go that way we're going to always know that the
script has been executed on the correct database.
And even if we change this by accident and we run this script it gets changed by this line.
All right so here we've got select star from pets and so Nexstar from owners.
So how are we going to be joining.
What are we going to be using the left join for here.
Well here we've got pet the pets the information about the pets.
In this first table and in the second table we've got information about the owners what if we want to
find out which pet belongs to which owner.
Right.
How do we find out who is the owner of which pet.
And that's exactly what a LEFT JOIN will help us do here.
We've got information about the pet I.D. and the pet name the type of pet whether it's a dog cat or
a parrot gender age.
And then we've got the owner I.D. So this is our key to joining to this table because you can see here
we also have owner I.D. and I'm not just saying metaphorically it is actually called the key.
This is our foreign key in this table.
We've got a primary key which is this which is this column.
It's it's a unique identifier for every single row and then you go to a foreign key which is owner ID
was it a foreign key because this key is a primary key in this table.
And it serves as the link between the two tables.
So that's what we're going to rely on and we're going to create a live joint where we have the pats
on the left and on the right.
We're going to add this table on the right to owners table and the link between the two will be the
owner ID field.
So today we'll learn how to do that.
And just before we start interesting observation is that this table has 100 rows whereas this table
has 89 rows.
So why would why could that be the case.
Right.
Why is there.
Why are there more pets than owners.
Well one thing that pops mine is maybe they are pets that don't have owners.
But in reality that is impossible because somebody had to bring the pet to the veterinarian.
So when an owner brings their pets the owner's name is recorded and the pet name is recorded and information
is recorded for both so by default every single pet will have an owner.
So then how come they can be more pets and owners.
Well the other alternative is that there can be owners who have several pets.
So somebody might have a dog and a cat or might have two dogs and so on.
And that's what we're going to actually observe in this joint to do just good to be prepared for stuff
like that.
All right so let's go ahead and create this left join.
So you would say select star from there we're going to type in the first table every once in just say
pets.
You don't really need to type in TBO because that's that's that's where it's going to be looking anyway.
So once you select start from pets and then here we're going to say left join and now we're going to
say the new table owners.
And so this is a start but this is not enough.
This is not enough information because you're telling us you all that you want to take this table put
on the left take the cell put on the right but you're not telling it which column which columns to use
as links between the two tables.
So what you want to do is you want to say on and on to say that that's the key words that is used to
specify on which column to join which called us to join.
So here when say owner ID owner ID equals owner ID.
So that's what we want to do in theory but in practice this is not going to work.
If I run this you'll see that there's going to be an error.
And why is that.
Well because already if we run these two lines again you'll see that owner ID this field is present
is this has the same exact name in both of these tables so I ask you all it knows that it's working
with these two tables and doesn't know which column from which table to get take this column and from
which they will take this column.
For us it's obvious right for us it's obvious we we know intuitively what we want to do want to take
this one from here and one take this on from here.
But for a computer it's ambiguous.
So what we're going to do is we're going take pets and we're going to say PED's dot and then we say
owners and then it goes the owner's daughter and that will specify that this column comes from this
table.
This call is called from this table.
So if you run this now you'll see that we've got a beautiful left join created for us.
So if we scroll down you'll see that we have 100 rows because that's what 11. does.
It takes all of the rows of the table on the left and then to them it adds where possible columns on
the right.
And as you can see we don't have empty columns and in the second part or empty cells What was that.
Well that's actually tells us that indeed every single pair has an owner so there are no pets in this
resulting table where the owner part so this part where this part is empty so if somewhere this part
was empty that means a ped doesn't have an owner.
So basically that is a confirmation that all of the present owners and so therefore the second alternative
is true where some owners will have several pets and right away we can see here here's owner 1 5 3 0
8 9 McKenzie this person has.
So you can see is exactly the will just be by the owner and you can see that it's the same person this
person has at least three pets.
They have a bright the dog Angel the dog and Jake the cat.
And so if you look around you'll find more more examples of where an owner has several pets.
So there you go.
That's how a live joint works and that's how we have created it and hopefully the theoretical aspects
of live joins us now you can kind of see them in practice and how they're helping us combine information
from different tables.
And now we're just going to make it a bit more interesting.
We're going to say that.
OK.
So we've got this joint but let's say we don't want to select all the columns that say we want to select
just some of the columns.
Well let's say we want to select the name of the pet and we want to select the name of the person so
let's do that let's say name common name now name as a keyword so we're going to put it in brackets
in square brackets to make sure it doesn't trigger any unwanted actions on behalf of this girl.
And that way we know it's just a column.
Now again if we just run this line or we just run this code which you will find is again we've got this
ambiguous error.
Why's that.
Because there is a name column there is actually two named columns in this resulting table.
You've got name which is the name of the pet and name which is name the dog and so therefore Ezekiel
does not know where to get this column from.
So that's why we're going to do the same thing with said pets dog name and we say owners dog's name.
And now isko will know where to get these calls from.
Once you run it you'll see the name of the dog and name name of the pet.
So voila.
That is exactly how we deal with or work with JOINs and also that is how we specify columns when they
are ambiguous.
So it's actually a good idea to always put the prefix here so that you always know what's going on.
But sometimes it can be omitted if there is no ambiguity you don't have to really specify the prefix
which is the table name.
So there we go.
That's our introduction to Pracht the practical side of Joines and Conway to continue creating more
interesting joins in next Tauriel.
Until then happy analyzing.